# KH Main Essay - Connect the dots

> This was my essay when applying for the [Knight-Hennessy Scholarship program](https://knight-hennessy.stanford.edu/). No guarantees, though fingers crossed!

## <u>Connect the dots. How have the influences in your life shaped you?* (Limit: 500 words)</u>

Whenever I visit my 87-year-old grandmother, she asks the same two questions: “When are you coming home?” and “Are you eating enough?”.

Survivors of WWII and Mao’s Cultural Revolution, my grandparents helped raise me while my parents pursued their American dreams. Hailing from China’s rural farmlands, my grandfather taught me reliability and quiet strength, and he’d share stories ranging from his years in the militia to later quitting smoking and uprooting his retirement for me: the “son” he always yearned for. My grandmother embodies selfless compassion, and she always has the right Chinese medication and healthy skepticism towards drugs. Throughout my life, my mom supports them dutifully as their daughter and primary caretaker.  
 
My parents embody the duality of dreams – my mom favors stability while my dad favors ambition. After 16 years diligently prioritizing family, my dad moved to China to pursue his entrepreneurial dream, but he also created an undeniable rift in home and marriage. While my dad inspires me to pursue my passions, my mom inspires me to acknowledge the human-centric consequences of decisions. In design, the most important users often are those quietly left behind, and my parents inspire me to meditate deeply on how to help people feel whole again and cultivate optimism amidst silent suffering.

While my deepest scientific interests are in biology, I’m committed to improving healthcare’s digital infrastructure to support passionate, caring people burnt-out by healthcare’s bureaucratic nightmare. I empathize with clinicians trapped within systems counterproductive to their values and patients trapped in unhealthy, cyclical lifestyle habits. Regarding health, current technology takes more than it gives – why can’t healthcare technology feel warm and inviting like a lovingly prepared meal but instead reminds us of the cruel weight of systemic shortcomings? Optimism is beat-down after 100-hour workweeks in the ICU or lifetimes managing medical debt. However, by diligently listening to users, maybe technology can instead rejuvenate the energy surrounding medicine by prioritizing every individual’s wellness: the energy of life.

Amidst the noise surrounding medical AI, few realize that the richest medical data has yet to surface: a patient's values, experiences, and dreams. Clinicians relay this as the artists of medicine, yet substandard UX makes it challenging to express rich clinical semantics. Now more than ever, I reflect deeply on my role to improve healthtech: build something that combines expertise, empathy, and courage to engage Goliath. My mission is to build a company that resets the culture surrounding healthtech, and my story anchors on this: how can we foster healthier communities with collaborative expressiveness, like the original energy of the internet, and give silenced individuals the opportunity to speak? The best stories start unscripted and, with serendipity, become self-evident.

Before parting ways, my grandmother always conveys the same message: “eat well, sleep well, live well”. Connecting back to my roots, I’m committed to actualizing her message for the broader community. Wishing her the same, I now focus on answering her other question: “Are you done with school yet?”. Well, maybe… after one more crazy idea…
