# Statement of Purpose (Design, MS)

> This was my essay when applying for the [MS Design](https://designprogram.stanford.edu/) program. Unfortunately I did not get in, though I am going to see this through on my own! To see what I'm up to, see: [about](/about)

Eric S Pan

*The key to dramatically improving the US healthcare system is fixing incentives between payers, providers, and patients. The best way to do this is through data-driven, value-based medicine.*   

*The invisible barrier to achieving this is user experience & expression. We need a culture shock.*

## I. A Third MS? Completing my “Bootleg PhD”
I am applying for the MS Design program to rigorously advance my academic ideas, develop my creative style for user experience (UX), and cultivate a spirit of fun while working to improve user expression (UXpr) in healthcare. My goal for this MS is to capstone a “Bootleg PhD”: my first MS focusing on classes, my current MS focusing on ideas, and this final MS focusing on actualizing key ideas to the broader community. This feels like the perfect opportunity to pursue my “thesis”: making healthcare *feel* good – for both the energy and the ethos of the industry.

## II. Healthcare’s “iPhone moment” – what’s missing?
Healthcare is long overdue for its “iPhone moment” – an industry-defining event that redefines the landscape for the better. Innovating is difficult given the highly complex, regulated, and interdisciplinary landscape of healthcare. Despite healthcare’s huge market cap, the industry feels strapped for actual end-user value, and it’s difficult to pinpoint why. However, the answer might be simple: few organizations prioritize UX which makes users *feel* *bad*. The iPhone made an outlandish UX promise and actually delivered on it, and this made us *feel* *special*. It overcame accepted norms (e.g. popular tactile keyboards) with product innovation. This evolved from the energy uniquely possible from obsessive focus on UX. Healthcare needs something similar.

## III. The Culture of Data Integration (the “Invisible Barrier”)
From my industry experience, difficult data integration (interoperability) is an invisible barrier to true innovation: it creates a culture of default distrust in an industry where trust matters most. Many expect integration to “just work” like how the web “just works”, yet imagine how Web 1.0 would’ve turned out if the government had to background check every individual trying to participate: not fun\! It’s difficult to imagine a fraction of the technological innovation possible in this parallel dystopia. Indeed, an open culture is key for transformative innovations – even LLMs didn’t feel relevant until OpenAI debuted a free interface that met most people where they’re at. Data integration needs a similar breakthrough to enable the UX and UXpr that embodies the spirit of the internet, and this is unintuitive since [data integration is mostly viewed as plumbing](/essays/2024-3_DataMappingsAsPoetry).

## IV. If (Data = Oil), Then (Semantic Data = Gold)
The phrase “data is the new oil” was popularized in the late 2010s and becomes increasingly more relevant as [the Transformer architecture](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762) dominates the world of AI. This analogy captures broad truth yet doesn’t quite match the properties of data: unlike oil, data can be (and often is) duplicated frequently, it can have incredibly high variance, and often it’s useless without broader context. Oil is valuable as a proxy for physical energy, yet for data to provide the equivalent digital energy, careful curation is often required. What people really want is semantic data – data that encodes rich knowledge and contextual meaning. Today’s LLM breakthroughs are only possible by the generous availability of the last 30+ years of semantic richness available from the open web – a space celebrating UXpr. In healthcare, organizations want to profit from semantic data, yet not enough people focus on its sustainable curation: improving UXpr by making users *feel good* with UX. The culture of healthcare feels more like politics, where in reality, it yearns to celebrate the art of medicine and a patient’s relationship with their wellness: the energy of life.

## V. Plans for Stanford: Developing Tools for Breaking the “Invisible Barrier”
By continuing my studies at Stanford, I hope to advance a straightforward thesis: how can we make healthcare *feel* good? To enable change that meets people where they’re at, UX and UXpr need to be at the forefront, independent of the complexities of the system. In service of this, I plan to dive deep into three core academic ideas: a data engineering framework for integration engineers ([pydian](https://github.com/ericpan64/pydian)), a security framework for healthcare data operators ([the Pico Protocol](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1Nh9rKV58ZrMPNwecg8crO_W56ZOySID3/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=108978819231638632466&rtpof=true&sd=true)), and a patient-centric data model for machine learning developers (patl). Regardless of outcome, I’m confident that learnings from continued studies will be key in breaking the “invisible barrier” surrounding healthcare and fostering a culture of openness, trust, and creativity. 

## VI. Career Plans: Shifting Energy through Value Creation (Zero-Sum -> Infinite Game)
Many yearn for the [“learning health system”](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Learning_health_systems) which exudes an aspirational ethos and energy for medicine: get (and stay) healthy together. This assumes an “infinite game” where value can exist abundantly and energy is unbounded. However, without a culture of openness and trust, we’ve been stuck in a “zero-sum game” where new assets invite politics and power struggles over scarce resources. For healthcare, all sides clearly want established trust, however nobody wants to give-up the most. My plan is to develop the aforementioned academic ideas, publish them openly, and then rigorously implement these ideas in a way that hopefully both enables and inspires change. By openly delivering value first, an opportunity to flip the game may appear.

## VII. Post-Healthtech (An Optimistic Outlook)
Outside of healthtech, I’d love to explore spaces like systems biology, recycling, and film. Additionally, I’d love to revisit the original spirit of entrepreneurship: small businesses serving local communities. While I plan to spend most of my focus on healthtech, it’d be fun to engage with colleagues on these ideas and other creative excursions like tinkering on things at the PRL. As with the movie *The Grand Budapest Hotel*, a summary doesn’t do justice to the journey.

## VIII. Why Now?
An answer: to “meet myself where I’m at” and build skills to align healthcare with the energy of the open web. It’d be an honor to pursue this as part of the MS Design program at Stanford.
