# Developer note ~

... this is used for essay planning. Update the Svelte file directly to push changes


Next essay:
- Fancy Rug effect (IP)
- Walking is a superpower
- Civil discourse and complete thoughts

--- fun ideas ---

#### Walking as a superpower
- As young millenial, but also with a lot of gen Z friends, my brain has gotten more scattered in the recent years
	- Post-college, I was super intentional about deep thinking. I wasn't that good yet, though I put in a lot of effort and it turned out well. Now I know I have it in me, however until recently, I've struggled to reach the levels of my early 20's. And no, it's not because I'm almost 30 and "old" (a fun joke among us young milennials, though objectively a bit ridiculous)
	- What changed? My ability to "complete" thoughts dropped dramatically recently. Especially with AI, I'm able to act on so much more information, yet for a while, I was scrambling with a bunch of unfinished threads. Reasonable, and a bit unfortunate
	- Social media and TikTok culture (I like to think I'm above TikTok, but probably spend just as much time on my liquor of choice: YouTube shorts)
- Previous limiting beliefs thoughts on walks
	- I don't have a dog (though I did growing up, and now I have a cat!). I tried convincing my cat to go on a walk, it didn't work out as I hoped
	- I used to go on walks when I was in a relationship (relationships are hard, link to dating essay), something I enjoyed so much and being with my girlfriend at the time. Felt weird walking alone for a while, "reserved for those who get laid" so focused heavily on that, though one day realised, I didn't need to! I can walk on my own!
		- Introvert pro tip: smile lightly when people make eye contact and meet them for a second or two
	  - Being alone with your thoughts is a superpower. Self-therapy -- listening to yourself (Naval on JRE clip)
- Exercise is so good for you, and it doesn't need to be hard (though harder exercise is more condensed)
	- Most people have enough time during the day for 1 hour of walking. For me: if I spent 1 hour watching youtube shorts while walking, there it is! But also kills the point of the walk
- Walking frees-up the mind
	- Scientists having breakthroughts with chats on the walk
	- Walking lets the mind wander, and it gets harder before it gets easier (time to THINK)
		- Also: get reconnected to physical world, communities, out of the abstract
	- Ability to complete thoughts (!!) -- superpower
- Not everyone has the privledge to walk
	- People that physically can't (though can still travel thanks to modern medicine, though still groups of people that can't move)
	- Inversely... many have to walk for work already or travel long distances, etc., maybe there's a way to balance this
- All great progress happens in small steps
	- Seeing my diabetic grandma going from wheelchair-bound at 82 to walking daily at 87 is an inspiration to me. It started with simple, daily walks in the california sun. So gratifying, and I'm confident it has been great for her overall health
	- A phrase from my short time at Stanford d.school: meet people where they're at. Fortunately, others have paved roads for us. Weather can't always be great, but while there's peace safety and community, we can embrace our innate superpower: walking

#### Compilers are more important than ever
- Importance of compilers -- we stand on the shoulder of giants. Used to shrug it off as "too sweaty", though diving into the coursework gained both massive respect and some of the worst grades in my life
- Compilers are like open-source -- a gift from someone in the past, they handled the dirty work so we can all enjoy the benefits
- Compilers compress human knowledge into more composable and useful forms
- DSLs studying -- these are my people (I think! Have been a bit of a black swan generalist -- a little big of different things)
- The importance of HANDLING AMBIGUITY -- cultural difference in compilers, confronting ambiguity as it is, and going through it thoroughly, even if it takes 40 hours for one assignment. We gain knowledge for doing the dirty work, believe it or not
- ...
- LLMs as KNOWLEDGE COMPILERS, Prompts as DSLs (key idea!)
- ...

#### I miss the old Kanye, and the old democratic republic

... an argument for longer-form and more thoughtful discourse. And looking at the bigger picture. Give attention to ideas for their true value, not for the clickbait purposes (some things are truly egregious, and that's the extent of it, scale accordingly). Fragmentation of modern attention and society that is too quick to cancel. We're allowed to disagree with each other and still be civil -- that's the foundation of the USA and ideals of founding fathers.

--- more serious ideas ---
#### Life isn't fair, though marketplaces should be
- Many things in life are arbitrary -- in another life I could've been born in poverty. In a much closer timeline, I could've never made it to the US (e.g. parents stay in China) and my life would look so, so differently
  - Unfair disadvantage: Dr Lin getting non-smoker lung cancer... Stories like this. Genuinely amazing and good people getting hit with terrible circumstances. It is sobering
  - Unfair advantage: growing up in stable, open-minded immigrant household (combination of grit, ambition, but also ability to zoom-out)
- However, many things are within our control. While our initial unconscious minds are basically determined by our parents + living condition (I don't recall coherent sentient thinking / recognization of self until I was maybe in middle school), there's SO much we can do about our conscious mind, AND we can re-program our subconscious minds through honest ACTION (though it takes a lot longer and is necessarily indirect)
- The world is much, much bigger than us. So necessarily need to collaborate with other people
- Life is already unfair -- marketplaces should be as fair as possible. Though people will unfortunately (and understandably) try to scam, almost out of an energy that despises the unfairness life wroughts as part of existance
- In my opinion, the best in-practice is capitalism, and the most idealistic is communism (though in-practice this has generally been corrupt). In terms of checking power, democratic republics are best in-practice (the US is a democratic republic, not a pure democracy) while the most idealistic is monarchy (i.e. assuming a pure + just leader that considers constituents, it's more efficient to simplify decision-making)
  - The US has generally succeeded due to strong ideals and roots in checking power with democratic principles and encouraging fair markets through capitist markets (where competition is used to check power). Until proven otherwise, I'm convinced this is the best existing model 
  - US Healthcare drives me crazy -- clear imbalance of power, _because_ it cannot be checked. Essentially promoting a communist structure (assume common good) while operating in capitalist environment. Alas, necessary to have, yet much better ways to do so

#### practical introspection on stoic "indifferences"
- Virtue, vice, and framing of "indifferences". On the shortness of life vibes
- However, not really practical. Life is so broad! This essay is a "meet in the middle" analysis, for my own life
- ... (keep it focused, though expand later when inspiration hits!)

#### Civil discourse on contentious topics -- listening first and finishing thoughts
E.g. When is racism ok?
Historically racism as oppression, terrible
Being open minded — important
Accepting things in the present as they are while open to reshaping the future
Racism and culture — and where does the line get drawn
What we all want: peace and respect

##### Being a "codist" 

(i.e. it's a tool, not who you are, though helps reflect how you think, median stereotypes vs. true enthusiast who enjoys it for the sake of it)
    - It's bad to judge based on what people are born into (e.g. racism, sexist, etc.). Fundamentally unfair (although life is unfair)
    - Median analogies: JS (getting things done, hate coding), Java (getting things done, hate coding, boomer), C# (think like Java people and think they're better, and they're right)
    - Coding as writing: a reflection of how you think
    - Programming language is a tool -- form of expression of thinking. Generally, smartest people are willing to change their minds -- if there's a better tool then always open to try it (however, tradeoff in adopting tool, and often hard to say if it's actually needed or not -- smartest people also strive for values and higher-level objectives and practicality)
    - True enthusiast: do it for the sake of it. In which case, it really doesn't matter which language you use. Median coders aren't true enthusiasts (still something I'm still striving for too -- not quite there yet...)

#### Are ideas really "cheap"?
    - Business slang -- "ideas are cheap, execution is everything". But some of the most brilliant innovations necessarily come from R&D and academia, where having the _right_ idea is one of the most defining factors of research
    - Most ideas are cheap, since most ideas are just talk. And they're simple to come up with. Regardless take thinking
        - A simple idea can turn into a brilliant business with exceptional execution -- e.g. Airbnb (just rent your extra space), DoorDash (just deliver for local restaurants), etc.
    - Currency: time. Simple ideas can take very little time to come up with, so to "optimize" the business game (i.e. make money), if you're really good at executing then just pick a simple idea (not advice)
    - Execution is always expensive
    - Brilliant ideas are also expensive -- takes years of thinking, healthy rumination, creativity, back and forth, collaboration, reading and writing, etc. for the right ideas to surface from human intelligence
    - All problems need good enough execution
    - Some problems need both brilliant execution and brilliant ideas
    - Encouragement for fostering ideas more without shutting them down -- "how does this make money?", time and place for different questions

#### Where thoughts end (e.g. reaching the "end" for a chain of reasoning)

Philosophical musing: ends are both things we define but also absolute

#### Macro-right and Micro-right
Where big-picture is right, and "little picture" is needed to get there
business school stuff, d.health, etc.
Operating and accepting reality as-is

#### How hot yoga saved my startup*
Focus on the practice
Internal journey
Overcoming insecurity from hot yoga 7 years ago

#### On the right amount of money
Answer: enough. But what does money mean to people anyways?

#### Solo founder workflows in AI age: an opinionated take
Different LLMs for different operators
Agentic coding (IndieDevDan plug)
Low ego -- use low-code tools or whatever makes you faster and more flexible (e.g. n8n, Nate Herk shoutout)


--- other ideas ---

2024.04.29 9:20 PM
#### "A proxy for something else"

- The Psycology of money: security, freedom, etc.
	- Though having savings and money in the bank, not enough to be mindless, but enough to live well for a year. Is it really like that?
	- Rewiring thinking and approach: valuing time, though also being cognizant of things

The psycology of schools: an "optimal" GPA isn't static...
- Empirically: 3.3 GPA was told as "optimal": you're passing classes, but really hacking on other stufff
	- Really a proxy for people working all of the time on things they care about
- GPA is about how well you execute within a fixed stage and given assignments from others
	- Very valuable for corporate jobs -- how well did you follow orders
	- Valuable for entrepreneurship -- when you set a plan, you're giving youself orders


2024.04.29 8:55 PM
#### The stories we tell ourselves
- The inner narrative -- importance of shaping it
- "Law of attraction", more like retrofitting our understanding of reality
- Thinking of the boundary: the actualized, the potential, and the reality of things
- *Process over outcome*: nobody knows the outcome for sure (though absolutely in our advantage to predict and get good at it)
	- Always room to be pleasantly surprised
- Linking back to healthy behaviors: 
- "Reality Distortion"

On copying people you look up to: fake it til you make it...
- PG on writing essays
	- Rewatched the startup video maybe ~10 times. Wild!
- Grand Budapest Hotel: how you live is a homage to the people that shape you and their stories...


#### What are you most afraid of? (+ my answer)
- Giving it your all: requires *confronting reality and accepting the outcome as-is*. CANNOT control the outcome
- Biggest fear: not giving it my all because I couldn't confront reality because I didn't believe in myself...

Going off the societal "rails" - staying sane while pursuing creative work
... while staying sane

- Accept that it's a non-linear process
	- *The Practice*
- Measure progress against yourself
	- Learn to minimize envy from others -- inevitable, but a skill
- Think about the *floor* -- if 
	- Accept the risk, or raise the floor (for me: savings + education, though tbh, always have moving in with parents which is a blessing and made more school easier)

My answer (as of now): most afraid of being unconscious in my own life (e.g. "sleepwalking" or living an undeliberate life, "going through the motions", etc.). This means a lack of appreciation, gratitute for everything: joys, boredom, sorrow, etc... to reject it trades peace for ease. I'm ok with a hard life, and I want to do what it takes to cultivate peace, ideally for others and starting with myself.

#### Value Creation and Value Capture
2023.12.04 8:23 PM

Distinguishing between the two -- first is eng/design/etc., second is business, bridge is product

I care a lot about **value actualization** -- most of the times think that's through value creation...

